Text One
Adventure activities in New Zealand
adapted from an article by Victoria Philpott

In this passage, the writer describes some adventurous activities she has taken part in.

‘You’ll feel the wall against your face, and pressing up on your back. Just ease yourself
down between the gap and watch out for any creatures that might jump in your face.
That’s it, slowly, slowly.’
That was my guide Nix speaking. I was attempting to do as instructed and abseil down
a tight gap going underground in Waitomo, New Zealand. This involved descending a
steep slope by using a rope passed around my body and fixed at a higher point. The
harness was pulling tight around my thighs and my left hand was burning from gripping
the rope too hard. With my right hand I gripped the rope controller, more out of a
desperation to hold onto something still and sturdy rather than any actual safety aspect.
This was the Black Abyss Tour with the Black Rafting Company, but I hadn’t quite
processed exactly what it would involve before I signed up.

We were fitted for shoes, thick wetsuits, socks, helmets and harnesses. So, brighter,
younger and more enthusiastic than I’ll ever be again I was ready for action. Ready for the
35 metre abseil into the ground and under it.

Our guides, Nix and Flash, were very reassuring and seemed fairly confident I’d be able
to do it. Between them they had loads of experience and I felt safe in their hands. Good
enough odds for me. We did a little practice with the abseil ropes on the grassy verge
before we went for the real thing. When it got to stepping off the platform into a
40 metre drop, doing it on the slight incline we’d been practising on seemed very
different. It seemed to take an age to work my way down, the walls were slippery, it was
hard to get any firm grip and I was terrified of creatures jumping out at me as Nix had
warned.

‘Am I nearly there yet?’ I shouted into the abyss as the rope burn was starting to get too
much for me. Foolishly timed as usual, one more release of the rope and I’d finished. Of
course, the moment it was over I decided it hadn’t taken long enough and just wanted to
go back and do it again. After a little rest on the rocks waiting for the rest of my group we
carried on to the flying fox.

The flying fox
The flying fox is a zip line. In this case it was underground and ended in a thwack against
the cave wall. Or that’s what it sounded like from the people in front of you. When I
actually did it I realised there was a stopper on the zip line preventing you from bashing
into anything but leaving you spinning in the air if you go at it full force, like I did. Still I
screamed and squealed to scare those yet to do it.

After the trauma of this we had a little break with some hot chocolate and a snack to give
us the energy to complete the next stage. We sat drinking on the edge of a 3 metre drop
into water while Nix and Flash packed up the zip line stuff. I was terrified they were going
to make us jump off into the water.

The leap of faith
They did. We had to hold an inflatable ring under our bottoms and jump into the freezing
water. One of the girls in my group cried, she really didn’t want to do it. I toughened up
and went for it. It was freezing cold.

Flanking the side of the caves was a rope and we could pull ourselves along, admiring
the glow worms as we went. We got to a certain point and Flash made us connect our
feet under the arms of the person in front. We glided along the water in a chain. After
we’d cruised around for a bit in the inflatable rings we got up and started to walk around
in the underground wilderness. We dived down slides, had to push ourselves through
narrow passages and navigate the rocky terrain in the dark, with just our head torches to
light the way.

The final challenge
We had another break for some hot orange juice and a block of chocolate before the final
stretch. The final challenge was to climb out of two waterfalls freestyle. The water was
pummelling down and you had to go around it and up, carefully placing your feet as you
went. Flash was on hand to give some climbing tips, but at this point, four hours after
we’d started, my legs were ridiculously tired. They were weak and trying to push myself
up over the brow of the waterfall I feared would finish me off.

Like everyone before me, I made it out. It felt weird to be in daylight again. We had a
quick photograph under the waterfall outdoors and it was finally time to take the wetsuit
and shoes off.

After a much-needed hot shower we met again in the cafe to see our photos with some
hot soup and bread and reminisced about our awesome day at Black Water Rafting in
New Zealand. Definitely an experience to remember.


Text Two
The Whirlpool Rapids
adapted from a short story by Margaret Atwood

In this passage, the writer describes a terrifying experience.

When she was twenty-one, Emma had an extremely narrow escape.

It was a freak accident, and the fact that she was there at all was an accident too, the
result of a whim and of knowing someone. The person she knew was a man about her
own age, called Bill. He wanted her to come on a test run, he said. The travel agency he
was working for was developing a new kind of adventure: down the Whirlpool Rapids
below Niagara Falls, on a big rubber raft. They’d done the run nine times so far, and it
was perfectly safe, but they weren’t ready to open to the public until they’d had one
more test. It struck him as the kind of thing that might appeal to Emma. Emma said yes at
once.

The raft was black and enormous, and seemed, resting at its moorings, very stable.
Emma was given an orange life jacket, and buckled herself into it. Then they scrambled
on board and found seats at the front end. They were among the first to arrive and had to
wait for the others. Emma began to feel slightly let down and to wonder why she’d come.
The raft was too big, too solid; it was like a floating car park.

But once they’d moved out into the current, the rubber surface under her began to
ripple, in large waves of contraction, like a giant throat swallowing, and spray came in
upon them, and Emma knew that the rapids, which had looked so decorative, so much
like cake icing from a distance, were actual after all. There were some dutiful thrilled
noises from the other passengers, and then some genuine noises, less thrilled.

There was a lot of talk later about why the tenth run should have failed so badly, after the
other nine had gone without a hitch. All she saw was the front of the raft tipping down
into a trough deeper than any they’d yet hit, while a foaming wall of water rose above
them. The raft should have curved sinuously, sliding up the wave. Instead it buckled
across the middle, the front half snapping towards the back, like the beak of a bird
closing. Emma and Bill and the other people in the front row shot backwards over the
heads of the rest, who were jumbling in a heap at the bottom of the V, now submerging.
Something struck her on the side of the head - a boot, perhaps - and she was under
water. Later she learned that the raft had flipped and a man had been trapped
underneath it so it was just as well that she had been flung clear. But under water she did
not think. Something else made her hold her breath and struggle towards the surface,
which she could see above her, white and silver, so her eyes must have been open. Her
head rose up, she gasped air and was sucked under.

The water tumbled and boiled and Emma fought it. She was filled almost to bursting
with an energy that came from anger: I refuse to die in such a stupid way, was how she
expressed this afterwards. There were rocks, and she collided with several and was
bruised and scraped, but nothing more hit her head, and after what seemed like an hour,
but was really only ten minutes, the current was less and she found she could keep her
head above the water and actually swim. She propelled herself towards the shore, and,
finally, dragged herself up onto a small rocky beach. Her running shoes were gone. She
must have kicked them off, though she couldn’t remember doing it; or maybe they had
been torn off. She wondered how she was going to get over the rocks without shoes.

She must have been cut, her clothes were certainly ripped, there was a lump on the side
of her forehead, but she didn’t notice any of this at the time.

She was taken to the hospital and treated for shock, and interviewed on television. Her
picture was, briefly, in the papers.

But the most obvious effect of the accident on Emma was her strong subsequent belief
that she was invulnerable. She had been thrown into the Whirlpool Rapids of Niagara
Falls and had lived; therefore nothing could touch her. She walked in a bubble of
charmed air, which at times she imagined she could almost see, shimmering around her
like mist; like, in fact, the mist that rose from the Falls themselves.
